Add documentation for Heft (#16)
microsoft/rushstack.io-website: pages/heft/architecture.md

---
layout: page
title: Heft architecture
navigation_source: docs_nav
---

## Terminology

Heft's operation is organized around the following concepts:

> - **action** - a Heft command-line name (as formalized by Rush Stack's [ts-command-line](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@rushstack/ts-command-line) system).  For example, the "test" action appears in the  `heft test --clean` command.  Actions are the user interface, essentially macros tailored for typical developer activities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **action** - a Heft command-line verb (as formalized by Rush Stack's [ts-command-line](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@rushstack/ts-command-line) system).  For example, the "test" action appears in the  `heft test --clean` command.  Actions are the user interface, essentially macros tailored for typical developer activities.
```

> - **plugin** - a TypeScript class that implements the `IHeftPlugin` contract to provide arbitrary functionality.  Plugins are loaded optionally based on Heft's configuration.  You can create your own NPM package that exports custom plugins for Heft to use.  See [Core Plugins]({% link pages/heft/core_plugins.md %}) for a list of the built-in plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **plugin** - an object that implements the `IHeftPlugin` contract to provide arbitrary functionality.  Plugins are loaded optionally based on Heft's configuration.  You can create your own NPM package that exports custom plugins for Heft to use.  See [Core Plugins]({% link pages/heft/core_plugins.md %}) for a list of the built-in plugins.
```

Author: Although plain JavaScript objects are certainly possible, that seems like a practice we'd want to discourage.  Heft's API is complex and still evolving, so it might be frustrating to try to maintain an untyped plugin. Also, being "designed for TypeScript" is a pretty cool selling point compared to Webpack which has retrofitted types that aren't always super intuitive.

- **hook** - Heft leverages Webpack's [tapable](https://www.npmjs.com/package/tapable) system for enabling plugins to register handlers for various events during the build.
- **task** - a Heft operation that produces an output, typically by invoking some tool.  For example, `typescript` and `eslint` are Heft tasks.  Unlike in other systems, Heft's tasks are not a coding contract or TypeScript interface; for example the `TypeScriptPlugin` implements three separate tasks (`typescript`, `eslint`, and `tslint`) whose code is closely integrated.

> - **stage** - a larger sequence of work encompassing multiple Heft tasks.  When invoking Heft, the command line typically selects a meaningful set of stages to run. The stage names are also used to group logging output.  Examples of Heft stages: "clean", "compile", "bundle", "test"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **stage** - a larger sequence of work encompassing multiple Heft tasks.  When invoking Heft, the command line typically selects a meaningful set of stages to run. The stage names are also used to group logging output.  Examples of Heft stages: "clean", "build", "test"
```
